Skip Navigation
[Image: logo]

[Image: logo]

Markets
Pre-Markets
U.S. Markets
Europe Markets
China Markets
Asia Markets
World Markets
Currencies
Cryptocurrency
Futures & Commodities
Bonds
Funds & ETFs
Business
Economy
Finance
Health & Science
Media
Real Estate
Energy
Climate
Transportation
Industrials
Retail
Wealth
Life
Small Business
Investing
Invest In You
Personal Finance
Fintech
Financial Advisors
Options Action
ETF Street
Buffett Archive
Earnings
Trader Talk
Tech
Cybersecurity
Enterprise
Internet
Media
Mobile
Social Media
CNBC Disruptor 50
Tech Guide
Politics
White House
Policy
Defense
Congress
Equity and Opportunity
Europe Politics
China Politics
Asia Politics
World Politics
CNBC TV
Live Audio
Latest Video
Top Video
CEO Interviews
Europe TV
Asia TV
CNBC Podcasts
Digital Originals
Watchlist
Investing Club
Newsletter
Morning Meeting
Trade Alerts
Trust Portfolio
PRO
Pro News
Pro Live
Subscribe
Sign In
Make It
USA
INTL
Watchlist
SIGN IN
[Image: logo]

Markets
Business
Investing
Tech
Politics
CNBC TV
Watchlist
Investing Club
PRO
Asia Economy
Singapore's economic situation is 'dire' as global coronavirus resurgence looms, central bank says
Published Thu, Jul 16 20203:16 AM EDT
[Image: thumbnail]

Yen Nee Lee@YenNee_Lee
WATCH LIVE
Key Points
Singapore's economic situation remains "dire" due to the coronavirus pandemic, said Ravi Menon, managing director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore.
Unemployment and corporate bankruptcies are likely to increase in the coming months, he said.
MAS, the country's financial regulator and central bank, reported a net profit of 10.6 billion Singapore dollars ($7.63 billion) in the financial year ended March 31.
Signage for the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) is displayed outside the central bank's headquarters in Singapore.
Sam Kang Li | Bloomberg | Getty Images
Singapore's economy is still in a "dire" situation due to the coronavirus pandemic, with unemployment and corporate bankruptcies likely to increase in the coming months, the country's central bank said Thursday.

The Southeast Asian economy entered a technical recession after shrinking by 41.2% in the second quarter compared with the previous quarter, according to advance estimates released this week by the Ministry of Trade and Industry. Its official forecast is for the economy to contract between 4% and 7% this year — which would be the most severe downturn since the country's independence in 1965.  

A technical recession is defined as two consecutive quarters of quarter-on-quarter contraction in gross domestic product — a broad measure of the value of goods and services produced in an economy.  

"We are not at the beginning of the end, but rather the end of the beginning," said Ravi Menon, managing director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, which is the country's financial regulator and central bank.

"The recovery is likely to be slow and uneven, weighed down by renewed outbreaks of infection here or abroad," he added. "We will enter 2021 with higher levels of debt, in both the corporate and household sectors, which will act as a further drag on growth and could become a source of vulnerability."

But the country's financial system remains robust and resilient to withstand the economic weakness, said Menon. He explained that the authority's stress test showed that major banks and insurers, even under "very adverse" scenarios, have sufficient buffers to weather the uncertainties.

Singapore, a major financial center, is home to many global banks and insurance firms.

Menon was speaking at a media conference, where the MAS reported a net profit of 10.6 billion Singapore dollars ($7.63 billion) in the financial year ended March 31. Half of the profits – around 5.3 billion Singapore dollars ($3.81 billion) — will be returned to the government, while the remainder will be added to MAS' reserves.

Singapore has been one of the hardest hit Southeast Asian countries in the coronavirus outbreak, data compiled by Johns Hopkins University showed. As of Wednesday, the city-state has reported more than 46,800 cases and 27 deaths, according to the Ministry of Health.

The government has dug into its reserves to fund four fiscal stimulus packages worth close to 100 billion Singapore dollars ($71.8 billion), or around 20% of gross domestic product.

Menon said the central bank will keep the exchange rate stable "to provide an anchor of confidence."

Singapore uses the exchange rate, instead of interest rate, as its main monetary policy tool. The MAS earlier this year eased policy by setting its exchange rate band — which measures the Singapore dollar against a basket of currencies — on a zero-appreciation path and shifting down the midpoint of the band.

"The aim of monetary policy during this crisis is to prevent a broadening of disinflationary pressures that would be destabilizing for the economy," said Menon.

[Image: logo]

TV
WATCH LIVE
[Image: logo]

WATCH IN THE APP
UP NEXT | ETListen
[Image: logo]

TV
WATCH LIVE
[Image: logo]

WATCH IN THE APP
UP NEXT | ETListen
[Image: logo]

Subscribe to CNBC PRO
Licensing & Reprints
CNBC Councils
Supply Chain Values
CNBC on Peacock
Advertise With Us
Join the CNBC Panel
Digital Products
News Releases
Closed Captioning
Corrections
About CNBC
Internships
Site Map
Ad Choices
Careers
Help
Contact
News Tips
Got a confidential news tip? We want to hear from you.

Get In Touch
CNBC Newsletters
Sign up for free newsletters and get more CNBC delivered to your inbox

Sign Up Now
Get this delivered to your inbox, and more info about our products and services. 

Privacy Policy|Do Not Sell My Personal Information|CA Notice|Terms of Service
© 2022 CNBC LLC. All Rights Reserved. A Division of NBCUniversal

Data is a real-time snapshot *Data is delayed at least 15 minutes. Global Business and Financial News, Stock Quotes, and Market Data and Analysis.

Market Data Terms of Use and Disclaimers
Data also provided by

[Image: Reuters]