premium
latest
news
views
capital
digital edge
options
videos
edgeinvest
Home News Singapore economy
Singapore economy
Singapore's economic growth to hit 3% to 5% in 2022; inflation still a pressing concern
[Image: Amala Balakrishner]

Amala BalakrishnerThu, Apr 28, 2022 4/28/2022 • 12:0 PM GMT+08 • 13 days ago • 4 min read
[Image: Font Resizer]

[Image: Font add size]

[Image: Font reduce size]

[Image: Share to Whatsapp]

[Image: Share to Facebook]

[Image: Share to LinkedIn]

[Image: More Share]

[Image: Singapore's economic growth to hit 3% to 5% in 2022; inflation still a pressing concern]

Singapore’s economy is seemingly on track to continue its expansionary path in the coming quarters, following the government’s major step in treating Covid-19 as endemic. (Image credit: Bloomberg)
[Image: Font Resizer]

[Image: Font Resizer]

[Image: Font Resizer]

[Image: Share to Whatsapp]

[Image: Share to Facebook]

[Image: Share to LinkedIn]

[Image: More Share]

[Image: Scroll to top]

Follow us on Facebook and join our Telegram channel for the latest updates.
Singapore’s economy is seemingly on track to continue expanding in the coming quarters despite the ongoing tensions between Russia and Ukraine and the resultant impact on global supply chains.

The optimism follows the major easing of domestic safe management measures and borders restrictions as the republic moves toward treating Covid-19 as endemic, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) highted in its half-yearly macroeconomic review on Apr 28.

"Domestic demand, particularly private consumption as well as public infrastructure investment, would be the main source of growth in 2022,” it flagged.

For instance, Singapore’s hoping to see a revival in its retail and travel-related industries in 2Q2022, earlier than the second half of the year as was expected.

"The drivers of growth should broaden to the domestic-oriented and travel-related clusters over the course of this year. Accordingly, sectors which bore the brunt of the pandemic are projected to stage a more decisive recovery and contribute more significantly to gross domestic product (GDP) growth in 2022 compared with last year," MAS added.

See also: Singapore imposes new rules on family offices as Hong Kong recovers from Covid-19

Against this backdrop, the central bank is maintaining its forecast for Singapore’s GDP to grow by 3% to 5% this year, barring an escalation in tensions between Russia and Ukraine and a deterioration in the Covid-19 crisis.

While the projected growth range is a moderation from the 7.6% expansion seen in 2021, it still be above-trend for the second consecutive year, MAS explained.

Even so, the government body noted that inflation has been a major global concern, especially since the Russian – Ukraine crisis has affected the supplies and in turn prices of commodities such as food grains, oil and gas and industrial metals.

The supply-driven price shocks are now eroding real incomes and could potentially depress demand for goods and services as well as investment flows, MAS cautioned.

See also: Singapore's March retail sales surprises on upside with 8.7% y-o-y growth

Being a export and import-oriented economy means that Singapore is very susceptible to rising inflation levels from its trading partners.

Core inflation - which measures the total level of inflation excluding that for accommodation and private transport - hit a 10-year high last month, and is expected to remain significantly higher than the historical average of about 1.6%.

This triggered a monetary policy tightening by the central bank to curb the surge in prices. This is the third time it is doing this since October 2021.

The central bank is expecting core inflation to hit a peak of around 4% in 3Q2021 before moderating in late 2022. This is assuming that there is some stabilisation in global commodity prices and supply constraints are partially resolved.

While labour shortages could ease, "elevated oil and agricultural commodity price levels are forecast to filter through to higher operating costs in Singapore over an extended period", it explained

"Together with rising unit labour costs stemming from the tight labour market, business costs will accumulate further and be passed through to consumer prices amid firm demand," MAS added.

To this end, it warned that the higher input costs could curtail manufacturing, while the higher inflation and weaker confidence levels could potentially restrain domestic consumption and investment.

To stay ahead of Singapore and the region’s corporate and economic trends, click here for Latest Section

Going forward, MAS noted that the fallout from the Russia-Ukraine war will hit most of the external-oriented sectors in Singapore.

For instance, the semiconductor industry is expected to take a hit as Russia Ukraine are major suppliers of two crucial inputs – Russia produces 37% of the global supply of palladium while Ukraine supplies 70% of neon.

Singapore’s semiconductor may not feel the pinch as much since it imports palladium mainly from the UK and US. However, threesome of the palladium suppliers here may actually be importing from Russia, MAS pointed.

Meanwhile, the republic’s key electronics sector seems to be doing well, presumably because it is less reliant on oil and energy.

Overall, MAS is optimistic that the economic growth of Singapore’s key trading partners will be expansionary. "Demand in the advanced economies should stay well-supported by the buffer provided by household savings and wealth accumulated during the pandemic," it stressed.

TAGS
Singapore economy
2022 GDP
Singapore inflation
Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS)
half-yearly macroeconomic review
Related Stories
[Image: Easing of restrictions brings cheer to economy but rising inflation remains a challenge]

Singapore economy
Easing of restrictions brings cheer to economy but rising inflation remains a challenge
by Amala Balakrishner• April 28, 2022
[Image: Briefs: Singapore's probe into Noble Group to reach conclusion by 3Q; MAS chief on crypto rules]

Global Economy
Briefs: Singapore's probe into Noble Group to reach conclusion by 3Q; MAS chief on crypto rules
by The Edge Singapore• April 28, 2022
[Image: Singapore's crypto rules must be strict but clear: MAS chief]

Cryptocurrency
Singapore's crypto rules must be strict but clear: MAS chief
by Bloomberg• April 28, 2022
Subscribe to our newsletter
Never miss out on important financial news and get daily updates today
Highlights
[Image: Kimly reports 14.7% lower earnings of $18.5 mil for 1HFY2022; proposes interim dividend of 0.56 cents]

Results
Kimly reports 14.7% lower earnings of $18.5 mil for 1HFY2022; proposes interim dividend of 0.56 cents
May 11, 2022
Trending Now
Analysts unanimously rate AEM as ‘buy’, but Citi raises target price, while Maybank lowers TP
PhillipCapital upgrades CICT to 'buy' as it sees recovery in full swing
Analysts expect to see q-o-q improvement in Wilmar's 2QFY2022 results following 'decent' 1QFY2022
Trade US stocks with zero commissions for life via Tiger Brokers (Singapore)
Ascendas REIT to acquire seven logistics properties in Chicago for $133.2 mil
Related Stories
[Image: Easing of restrictions brings cheer to economy but rising inflation remains a challenge]

Singapore economy
Easing of restrictions brings cheer to economy but rising inflation remains a challenge
April 28, 2022
[Image: Briefs: Singapore's probe into Noble Group to reach conclusion by 3Q; MAS chief on crypto rules]

Global Economy
Briefs: Singapore's probe into Noble Group to reach conclusion by 3Q; MAS chief on crypto rules
April 28, 2022
[Image: Singapore's crypto rules must be strict but clear: MAS chief]

Cryptocurrency
Singapore's crypto rules must be strict but clear: MAS chief
April 28, 2022
Subscribe to our newsletter
Never miss out on important financial news and get daily updates today
×
Loading next article...
[Image: The Edge Singapore]

Download The Edge Singapore App
[Image: Google play]

[Image: Apple store play]

Keep updated
Follow our social media
Subscribe to The Edge Singapore
Get credible investing ideas from our in-depth stock analysis, interviews with key executives, corporate movements coverage and their impact on the market.
Products & Services
NewsNewsletterVideosOptions
Edge InvestAdvertisingT&Cs
About Us
Contact UsEditorial TeamJoin Us
FAQsPrivacy PolicyMalaysia
© 2022 The Edge Publishing Pte Ltd. All rights reserved.