Education
General
Dictionary
Economics
Corporate Finance
Roth IRA
Stocks
Mutual Funds
ETFs
401(k)
Investing/Trading
Investing Essentials
Fundamental Analysis
Portfolio Management
Trading Essentials
Technical Analysis
Risk Management
Markets
News
Company News
Markets News
Trading News
Political News
Trends
Popular Stocks
Apple (AAPL)
Tesla (TSLA)
Amazon (AMZN)
AMD (AMD)
Facebook (FB)
Netflix (NFLX)
Simulator
Your Money
Personal Finance
Wealth Management
Budgeting/Saving
Banking
Credit Cards
Home Ownership
Retirement Planning
Taxes
Insurance
Reviews & Ratings
Best Online Brokers
Best Savings Accounts
Best Home Warranties
Best Credit Cards
Best Personal Loans
Best Student Loans
Best Life Insurance
Best Auto Insurance
Advisors
Your Practice
Practice Management
Continuing Education
Financial Advisor Careers
Investopedia 100
Wealth Management
Portfolio Construction
Financial Planning
Academy
Popular Courses
Investing for Beginners
Become a Day Trader
Trading for Beginners
Technical Analysis
Courses by Topic
All Courses
Trading Courses
Investing Courses
Financial Professional Courses
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Keeping the Recovery Going
Diversifying Investments Away From China
Addressing Japan's Demographic Problem
The Bottom Line: Outlook for Japan
Economy Economics
3 Economic Challenges Facing Japan in 2022
By
Panos Mourdoukoutas
[Image: Professor Panos Mourdoukoutas]

Full Bio
LinkedIn
Twitter
Panos Mourdoukoutas, Ph.D., is a professor of Economics at Long Island University Post and teaches finance courses on security analysis and global emerging markets at Columbia University, and has given lectures and seminars to private and government organizations around the world. He has published several papers in academic and professional journals on business, finance, and insurance, and has worked as an advisor to the Greek government on financial regulation and reform.

Learn about our editorial policies
Updated December 23, 2021
Reviewed by
Robert C. Kelly
[Image: Robert C. Kelly]

Reviewed by Robert C. Kelly
Full Bio
Robert Kelly is managing director of XTS Energy LLC, and has more than three decades of experience as a business executive. He is a professor of economics and has raised more than $4.5 billion in investment capital.
Learn about our Financial Review Board
In the 1980s, Japan's economy was the envy of the world. It grew by leaps and bounds, seemingly ready to bypass the U.S. to become world's largest economy. But then it didn't. An asset bubble that had built up during the 1980's burst in 1990, causing Japan's economy to falter. This pushed Japan's economy into a period of prolonged stagnation and deflation, a period known as the "Lost Decade," now plural, which has continued to the present day.

Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan (BOJ) and the Japanese government have tried a host of different measures to get the economy moving. For instance, the BOJ was the first central bank to ever implement Quantitative Easing (QE), a monetary policy of asset-buying, which sought to drive long interest rates to near-zero levels. The second Shinzo Abe administration, which took office in 2012, introduced the three programs of “Abenomics” to try to revive the economy. These were an aggressively expansionary monetary policy, increased government spending, and changes to regulation to increase trade and growth.

While these policies kept the Japanese economy from sliding into a prolonged recession or even a depression, they failed to move it out of stagnation.

Compounding the woes of the Japanese economy was the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020-21, which badly damaged its economy. For instance, real GDP declined at an annualized rate of over 32% in the second quarter of 2020, before recovering by only just over 20% the next quarter with more muted rises and falls over the next few quarters. Japans GDP, as of Q3 2021, remains below pre-pandemic levels.

Looking into 2022, Japan's economy faces several challenges, like keeping the economic recovery going, diversifying investments away from China, and addressing its demographic problems.
Key Takeaways
Since 1990, the Japanese economy has suffered from economic stagnation, and COVID-19 has worsened the situation.
Japan's recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic is incomplete, and keeping it going will be critical.
Supply chain issues, rising labor costs, and political issues have highlighted problems with Japan's reliance on China as a base for its manufacturing investments.
With a low birthrate and aging population, Japan's social security system is under strain and is suffering from labor shortages.
Keeping the Recovery Going
As is the case with other developed countries around the world, Japan's policymakers have been trying to keep the economic recovery going with fiscal stimuli, like a $1 trillion stimulus ​package that was instituted by the Japanese government in the spring of 2021, which Kishida, has agreed to continue and supplement with a new $944 billion budget for fiscal 2022.

But keeping the economic recovery going hasn't been easy around the world due to the supply chain bottlenecks and labor market frictions, which create temporary mismatches between the demand and supply side of the economy. As a result, economic growth has slowed down, as prices of goods and services spike, especially the price of food and energy

While rising food and energy prices are a problem for every country, it's even more severe for Japan, which is highly dependent on oil imports for its energy needs. High oil prices take a big chunk of household budgets, depressing further consumer spending, the primary factor behind the country's three-decade-old stagnation. Nonetheless, overall inflation still remains low, verging on deflation. Consumer prices rose at an annual rate of 0.1% in October, the same as in September, and well below the 2% Bank of Japan target, which it has struggled to meet for years.
Diversifying Investments Away From China
For years, China was a focus of manufacturing investment for Japan. China's cheap labor force provided a solution to Japan's labor shortage, helping its manufacturers stay competitive in the global economy. Meanwhile, China became a significant market for Japanese products.

In recent years, things have changed for a couple of reasons. One of them is that China's labor is no longer cheap, as the country is facing its own labor shortages, eroding its competitive advantage. In 2018, China's manufacturing labor costs $5.51 dollars per hour, well above the $4.45 in Mexico, and $2.73 in Vietnam.

Secondly, renewed tensions between the two countries over China's aggressive expansion in the South China Sea and military exercises near Taiwan.

Addressing Japan's Demographic Problem
Demographics is a chronic social and economic problem for Japan. Since the 1970s birth rates in Japan have plunged. This means fewer young people are entering the labor force leading to a decline in the country's productive potential.

The lack of young people, combined with very long lifespans, creates a very unfavorable dependency ratio. That's ratio of people paying into the country's social security fund to the number of retired people collecting from it. As a result, the social security fund runs deficits, which the Japanese government must cover from its fiscal budget. For instance, the 2022 fiscal budget allocates 660 billion yen to make up for a shortfall in the social security fund, up from an initial estimate of 480 billion yen. This shortfall is covered by issuing debt, and Japan's national debt is currently at 266% of GDP, the highest ratio in the developed world

But addressing demographic problems isn't something that can be addressed quickly or easily. It requires structural changes to the Japanese economy and immigration system.
The Bottom Line: Outlook for Japan
Japan is facing both cyclical and structural challenges as it begins the new year. Its cyclical challenges are global supply chain bottlenecks and labor market frictions, which continue to put downward pressure on its economy as it strives to recover from the global recession.

Structural challenges are associated with the three-decades-long economic slowdown associated with the burst of multiple asset bubbles in 1990 and a decline in the birthrate, which create labor shortages and an unfavorable dependency ratio.
Article Sources
Investopedia requires writers to use primary sources to support their work. These include white papers, government data, original reporting, and interviews with industry experts. We also reference original research from other reputable publishers where appropriate. You can learn more about the standards we follow in producing accurate, unbiased content in our editorial policy.
World Bank, "GDP Japan," Accessed Dec. 19, 2021

FRED. "Real Gross Domestic Product for Japan." Accessed Dec. 23, 2021.

Nikka Asia. "Japan plans record $944bn budget, marking 10-year spending spree." Accessed Dec, 20, 2021

eia, "Japan is the second-largest net importer of fossil fuels in the world," Accessed Dec 19, 2021
Tradingeconomics.com,"Japan's Inflation Rate," , Accessed Dec. 20, 2021

Statista.com, "Manufacturing labor costs per hour for China, Vietnam, Mexico from 2016 to 2020," Accessed Dec. 20, 2021

Reuters.com, "Something blue: Pandemic wedding plunge adds to Japan demographic woes,"
, Accessed Dec. 19, 2021

"NikkeiAsia, Japan plans record $944bn budget, marking 10-year spending spree,"
Accessed Dec. 18, 2021.

Tradingeconomics.com, Japan's Government Debt-toGDP Ratio, Accessed Dec. 18, 2021

The Times, "Panic looms over Japan’s plummeting birth rate," Accessed on Dec. 19, 2021

Compare Accounts
×
The offers that appear in this table are from partnerships from which Investopedia receives compensation. This compensation may impact how and where listings appear. Investopedia does not include all offers available in the marketplace.
Provider
Name
Description
Related Articles
[Image: ]

Government & Policy

International COVID-19 Economic Stimulus and Relief
[Image: Kabukicho Red Light District, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan]

Monetary Policy

Japan's Expansionist Policies Have Brought Unexpected Results
[Image: Stock index with Tokyo Stock Exchange]

ETF News

Best Japan ETFs for Q3 2022
[Image: A man running next to another man holding up a Chinese flag.]

International Markets

China's GDP Examined: A Service-Sector Surge
[Image: Jamie Dimon]

Company News

Highlights of Jamie Dimon's Letter to Shareholders
[Image: Inflation]

Economy

Inflation This Year and Next
Partner Links
Related Terms
About the Chilean Peso (CLP)
The Chilean peso (CLP) is the official currency of Chile and is issued by the Banco Central de Chile, the nation's central bank.
more
What Was the Great Depression?
The Great Depression was a devastating and prolonged economic recession that followed the crash of the U.S. stock market in 1929.
more
World Economic Outlook (WEO)
The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a report by the International Monetary Fund containing economic data and Fund forecasts for member countries and global regions.
more
Central Bank Definition
A central bank conducts a nation's monetary policy and oversees its money supply.
more
Defense Production Act (DPA)
The Defense Production Act (DPA) gives the president the power to order the production and supply of goods and services to support national defense.
more
What Is the Tankan Survey?
The Tankan survey measures economic conditions in Japan quarterly, and the survey results are considered a key economic indicator.
more
[Image: TRUSTe]

About Us
Terms of Use
Dictionary
Editorial Policy
Advertise
News
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Careers
California Privacy Notice