Menu
Reports
News
Countries
Indicators
Commodities
Awards
Resources
Blog
Home > Countries > United States

[Image: United States Economic Forecast]

U.S. Economic Outlook
May 3, 2022

The economy contracted slightly in Q1 according to preliminary data. Declines in federal, state and local government spending were partly to blame, with federal spending dampened by the winding-down of government support programs and lower defense expenditure. Lower private inventory investment and booming imports also weighed on the GDP reading. However, underlying dynamics were more encouraging: A red-hot labor market kept consumer spending growing briskly despite surging inflation and Omicron infections, while fixed investment growth sped up. Turning to the second quarter, GDP is expected to bounce back as the contribution of net trade improves. However, domestic demand is likely easing amid skyrocketing inflation and higher interest rates. Indeed, the S&P Global Composite PMI dipped to a three-month low in April on a softer services sector. Consumer confidence also ticked down in the month.
United States Economic Growth Growth is projected to slow in 2022 due to surging inflation and much tighter monetary policy. That said, low unemployment should support private consumption, investment should stay fairly healthy, and the energy sector will be boosted by the Ukraine war. Uncertainty over new Covid-19 variants, an intensification of the war, and tensions with China are risks. FocusEconomics panelists see GDP growing 3.2% in 2022, which is down 0.2 percentage points from the previous month’s forecast. In 2023, our panel sees the economy expanding 2.2%.
United States Economy Data
2015	2016	2017	2018	2019
Population (million)	321	323	325	327	329
GDP per capita (USD)	56,787	57,901	60,000	62,869	65,076
GDP (USD bn)	18,225	18,715	19,519	20,580	21,428
Economic Growth (GDP, annual variation in %)	2.9	1.6	2.4	2.9	2.3
Domestic Demand (annual variation in %)	3.6	1.9	2.6	3.1	2.4
Consumption (annual variation in %)	3.7	2.7	2.6	3.0	2.6
Investment (annual variation in %)	3.4	1.9	4.2	4.6	1.3
Exports (G&S, annual variation in %)	0.5	0.0	3.5	3.0	0.0
Imports (G&S, annual variation in %)	5.3	2.0	4.7	4.4	1.0
Industrial Production (annual variation in %)	-1.0	-2.0	2.3	3.9	0.9
Retail Sales (annual variation in %)	2.6	3.0	4.3	4.5	3.6
Unemployment Rate	5.3	4.9	4.3	3.9	3.7
Fiscal Balance (% of GDP)	-2.4	-3.1	-3.4	-3.8	-4.6
Public Debt (% of GDP)	104	107	105	107	108
Money (annual variation in %)	5.8	6.8	5.7	3.9	5.1
Inflation Rate (CPI, annual variation in %, eop)	0.6	2.1	2.1	1.9	2.3
Inflation Rate (CPI, annual variation in %)	0.1	1.3	2.1	2.4	1.8
Inflation (PPI, annual variation in %)	-0.9	0.4	2.3	2.9	1.7
Policy Interest Rate (%)	0.50	0.75	1.50	2.50	1.75
Stock Market (annual variation in %)	-2.2	13.4	25.1	-5.6	22.3
Current Account (% of GDP)	-2.2	-2.3	-2.3	-2.4	-2.3
Current Account Balance (USD bn)	-407.8	-428.4	-439.7	-491.0	-498.4
Trade Balance (USD billion)	-761.9	-749.8	-799.4	-880.3	-864.3
Sample Report
5 years of United States economic forecasts for more than 30 economic indicators.

Download

United States Economy Overview Economic Overview of the United States

Despite facing challenges at the domestic level along with a rapidly transforming global landscape, the U.S. economy is still the largest and most important in the world. The U.S. economy represents about 20% of total global output, and is still larger than that of China. Moreover, according to the IMF, the U.S. has the sixth highest per capita GDP (PPP). The U.S. economy features a highly-developed and technologically-advanced services sector, which accounts for about 80% of its output. The U.S. economy is dominated by services-oriented companies in areas such as technology, financial services, healthcare and retail. Large U.S. corporations also play a major role on the global stage, with more than a fifth of companies on the Fortune Global 500 coming from the United States.

Even though the services sector is the main engine of the economy, the U.S. also has an important manufacturing base, which represents roughly 15% of output. The U.S. is the second largest manufacturer in the world and a leader in higher-value industries such as automobiles, aerospace, machinery, telecommunications and chemicals. Meanwhile, agriculture represents less than 2% of output. However, large amounts of arable land, advanced farming technology and generous government subsidies make the U.S. a net exporter of food and the largest agricultural exporting country in the world.

The U.S. economy maintains its powerhouse status through a combination of characteristics. The country has access to abundant natural resources and a sophisticated physical infrastructure. It also has a large, well-educated and productive workforce. Moreover, the physical and human capital is fully leveraged in a free-market and business-oriented environment. The government and the people of the United States both contribute to this unique economic environment. The government provides political stability, a functional legal system, and a regulatory structure that allow the economy to flourish. The general population, including a diversity of immigrants, brings a solid work ethic, as well as a sense of entrepreneurship and risk taking to the mix. Economic growth in the United States is constantly being driven forward by ongoing innovation, research and development as well as capital investment.

The U.S. economy is currently emerging from a period of considerable turmoil. A mix of factors, including low interest rates, widespread mortgage lending, excessive risk taking in the financial sector, high consumer indebtedness and lax government regulation, led to a major recession that began in 2008. The housing market and several major banks collapsed and the U.S. economy proceeded to contract until the third quarter of 2009 in what was the deepest and longest downturn since the Great Depression. The U.S. government intervened by using USD 700 billion to purchase troubled mortgage-related assets and propping up large floundering corporations in order to stabilize the financial system. It also introduced a stimulus package worth USD 831 billion to be spent across the following 10 years to boost the economy.

The economy has been recovering slowly yet unevenly since the depths of the recession in 2009. The economy has received further support through expansionary monetary policies. This includes not only holding interest rates at the lower bound, but also the unconventional practice of the government buying large amounts of financial assets to increase the money supply and hold down long term interest rates—a practice known as “quantitative easing”.

While the labor market has recovered significantly and employment has returned to pre-crisis levels, there is still widespread debate regarding the health of the U.S. economy. In addition, even though the worst effects of the recession are now fading, the economy still faces a variety of significant challenges going forward. Deteriorating infrastructure, wage stagnation, rising income inequality, elevated pension and medical costs, as well as large current account and government budget deficits, are all issues facing the US economy.

U.S. Economic History

The end of World War II marked the beginning of a golden era for the U.S economy. This period was marked by a surge in economic activity and productivity, a growing and more prosperous middle class, and the rise of the baby boomer generation. From the late 1940s to the early 1970s, U.S. GDP grew at an average annual rate of nearly 4%. By the 1970s, the structural change in the economy away from industry and manufacturing to services was in full force. However, after several decades of unprecedented growth, the economy began to show signs of slowing and a series of events, including the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, the 1973 oil crisis and increased global competition, precipitated important economic changes. The 1970s were marked by a period of stagnating growth and inflation referred to as “stagflation”.

The 1980s gave rise to Reaganomics, a series of economic policies promoted by President Ronald Reagan. The main objectives were reduced government spending and regulation, as well as lower taxes and a tighter money supply. Regan was highly successful in overhauling the tax code and pushing ahead with deregulation in several major sectors of the economy; and while growth and productivity increased, the government’s debt multiplied significantly. In a broader sense, Reaganomics marked a turn toward free-market supply-side economics and away from the Keynsian-inspired economics that had been favored since the Great Depression.

Increasing global integration and the rise of new technology, including the adoption of productivity-enhancing IT in the workplace and the surge of high-tech companies, helped fuel an economic boom in the 1990s. The period between 1993 and 2001 marked the longest sustained expansion in U.S economic history, and powered a steep rise in employment, income and consumer demand.

Moreover, the strong growth and low unemployment during this time were particularly remarkable because the government budget was reigned in simultaneously and actually achieved a surplus for four years between 1998 and 2001. The fiscal improvement was made possible in part by tax increases introduced by President Bill Clinton, but also thanks to the booming economy and surging stock market. The stock market was driven up by the rise of internet-based companies in what is known as the “dot-com bubble”, which generated vast sums of unanticipated revenue for the government on capital gains taxes and rising salaries. However, the overvaluation of dot-com stocks eventually became apparent and the bubble burst in 2000.

The first years of the 2000s saw a sharp drop in economy activity following the dot-com burst. The terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, and several corporate scandals put a further damper on economic activity and business confidence. The Federal Reserve (the Fed), under Alan Greenspan, stepped in to counteract the struggling economy by introducing low interest rates. This move would later be considered a major factor in causing the massive housing market bubble that burst and precipitated the Great Recession that began in 2008.

United States’ Balance of payments

Over the past several decades, the U.S. current account balance has been heavily influenced by international trade flows, with the ongoing trade deficit resulting in a consistent current account deficit. Earnings on U.S. assets and investments owned abroad have a very small part in the current account, and a surplus in this category is not nearly enough to offset the large trade deficit. Overall, the current account deficit implies that the value of the goods and services being purchased from abroad by the United States exceeds the value of the goods and services being sold to foreigners. The U.S. current account deficit widened progressively since the 1990s and reached an all-time record and global high of 5.8% of GDP in 2006. The deficit has since narrowed due in part to increased domestic oil production.

The current account deficit is mirrored by a capital account surplus. The net amount of capital inflows received in the United States from abroad makes it possible to finance the current account deficit. Foreigners continue to invest in U.S. assets and companies, and so the net international investment position of the United States has grown over time. The United States is by far the top recipient of foreign direct investment (FDI). About 80% of FDI in the United States comes from a set of just nine industrialized countries. The UK, Japan and the Netherlands are the top sources of FDI in the U.S. The U.S. manufacturing sector draws about 40% of FDI.

United States’ Trade Structure

The U.S. is the 2nd leading exporter of goods and services in the world and the number one leading importer. The U.S. has consistently run a trade deficit, mainly due to the dependence on foreign oil to meet its energy needs and high domestic demand for consumer goods produced abroad, however thanks to advances in domestic oil production, the energy gap is closing. The main trading partners of the U.S. are Canada, China, Mexico and Japan. Canada is the main destination for U.S. exports, whereas China is the main source of imports.

The U.S. plays a major role in the international trade system and is generally seen as a proponent of reduced trade barriers and free trade agreements. The United States currently has more than a dozen free trade agreements in place. Among them are the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which was created in conjunction with Canada and Mexico in 1994. The United States is also an active member of the World Trade Organization (WTO).

Exports from the United States

Although the United States has lost some of its competitive edge in recent decades, material goods still represent two thirds of its total exports. The United States mainly exports high-value capital goods and manufactured products, including industrial machinery, airplanes, motor vehicles and chemicals. In 2015, the U.S. exported USD 1.510 trillion in goods.

The United States is the world’s leading exporter of services. This includes financial and professional business services as well as other knowledge-intensive services. Travel, transportation and tourism services are also a major export. Services represent about one third of total exports.

Imports to the United States

More 80% of total imports brought to the United States from abroad are goods. Roughly 15% of these imports are in the form crude oil, fuel oil and petroleum products. Industrial machinery, supplies and equipment represent another 15% of imported goods. Almost 25% of imported goods are capital goods, such as computers, computer accessories, electronics, medical equipment, and telecommunications equipment. Consumer goods represent another 25% of imported goods. Cellphones, pharmaceuticals, toys, household equipment, textiles, apparel, televisions, and footwear are the main types of consumer goods imported to the United States. An additional 15% of imported goods are automotive vehicles, parts, and engines. Food and beverages represent only about 5% of imported goods. Services represent only 20% of total imports, and are primarily financial services, as well as travel and transportation.

United States’ Economic Policy

The U.S. government has faced the momentous task of reversing the effects of the recession with a combination of expansionary fiscal and monetary policy. On the fiscal side, government stimulus spending and tax cuts prevented further deterioration of the economy. On the monetary side, the Federal Reserve has tackled economic weakness with both traditional and unconventional policies.

The United States is typically regarded as the home of free-market economic policies. However, the U.S. government exercises a significant amount of regulation over economic, commercial and financial activities. Following the recession, the government stepped up its oversight in the financial sector. The Dodd-Frank act, passed in 2010, represents the most comprehensive reform of financial markets regulation since the Great Depression.

United States’ Fiscal Policy

The U.S. government tends to spend more money than it takes in, and thus has incurred fiscal deficits almost uninterruptedly during the past several decades. The only time when the government managed to balance a budget in recent history was between 1998 and 2001, when the strong economy resulted in higher-than-usual tax revenues. The fiscal deficit reached the highest point since 1945 in 2009 at 9.8% of GDP, but has improved progressively since then; the deficit dropped to 2.4% of GDP in 2015.

The largest portion of government spending is mandated by existing laws, with a large amount of funds allocated to entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicaid. Mandatory spending represents nearly 60% of total government spending. The remainder is referred to as discretionary spending, and is determined by the annual federal budget. About half of the discretionary budget is spent on the military and defense, with the other half spent on government programs and public services.

Nearly 50% of tax obtained by the U.S. government comes from income taxes on individuals, with an additional 10% coming from income taxes on businesses and corporations. Another 35% of collections come from payroll and social security taxes. Excise taxes charged on goods such as liquor, tobacco and gasoline bring in a smaller amount, less than 5%. Tax revenues equaled about 18% of GDP on average between 1970 and 2010. Total tax revenues as a percentage of GDP were about 18% in 2015.

The stimulus package introduced by the Obama administration in 2009 included USD 288 billion in tax cuts and incentives. Less than two years later, Obama announced an extension to the tax cuts that had been introduced during the Bush administration at a cost of more than USD 400 billion over two years.

United States’ Monetary Policy

The U.S. Congress has established that the monetary policy objectives of the Federal Reserve are to promote maximum employment and price stability in what is known as the “dual mandate”. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is the Fed's monetary policymaking body. The FOMC meets about eight times a year to discuss developments and the outlook for the U.S. economy and to debate different policy options, including the level of interest rates. The federal funds rate, the main interest rate managed by the Fed, is the rate which deposit banks charge each other to trade funds overnight in order to maintain reserve balance requirements. The federal funds rate is one of the most important in the U.S. economy because it influences all other short term interest rates.

During the years since the recession hit, the Fed has been very active.. Interest rates were initially supposed to be kept low only until the unemployment rate dropped to 6.5% or inflation surpassed 2.5%. However, this specific forward guidance was revamped in March 2014 when the Fed announced that any future decisions to hike interest rates no longer depended on previously-established quantitative thresholds, but rather on the assessment of a broad range of more qualitative information. In an additional response to counter the effects of the recession, in December 2012, the Fed announced an unconventional policy known as “quantitative easing”. This policy involves the purchase of vast sums of financial assets in an attempt to increase the money supply and hold down long-term interest rates.

United States’ Exchange Rate Policy

The U.S. dollar is often referred to as the world’s currency because it is by far the most used currency in international transactions and also the most widely held reserve currency. Almost two thirds of currency reserves held throughout the world are in U.S. dollars.

Although the Treasury Department has the primary authority to oversee international financial issues, the Treasury’s decisions regarding foreign exchange are made in consultation with the Federal Reserve. However, U.S. intervention in the foreign exchange market has become increasingly less frequent. U.S. authorities typically let the open foreign exchange market and domestic monetary policies determine rates.
Sample Report
Get a sample report showing our regional, country and commodities data and analysis.

Download

United States Facts
Value	Change	Date
Bond Yield	1.92	-0.43 %	Dec 31
Exchange Rate	1.12	0.65 %	Dec 31
Request a Trial
Start working with the reports used by the world’s major financial institutions, multinational enterprises & government agencies now. Click on the button below to get started.

Sign Up

Upcoming Events
United States Economic News
United States: GDP records sharpest contraction since Q2 2020 in Q1, but underlying conditions are solid
April 28, 2022

GDP contracted 1.4% in seasonally-adjusted annualized rate terms (SAAR) in the first quarter, below the 6.9% expansion recorded in the fourth quarter of last year.

Read more

United States: Consumer confidence eases but remains in positive territory in April
April 26, 2022

Consumer confidence came in at 107.3 in April, down from March's 107.6.

Read more

United States: House prices grow at quickest pace since May 2013 in February
April 26, 2022

The S&P/Case-Shiller 20-city composite home price index rose 2.4% in month-on-month terms in February, which followed January's 1.4% increase.

Read more

United States: Retail sales growth moderates in March
April 18, 2022

Retail sales increased 0.4% in month-on-month seasonally-adjusted terms in March, which was softer than February’s 1.7% jump.

Read more

United States: Labor market tightens further in March
April 15, 2022

Total non-farm payrolls increased by 431,000 in March, following February’s 750,000 increase in payrolls.

Read more

Scroll to Top
Search form
Search
About Press Online Store My Cart Client Log In

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+

[Image: FocusEconomics]

Countries

Brazil
China
Eurozone
France
Germany
India
Italy
Japan
Russia
United Kingdom
United States
All Countries
Economic Indicators

GDP Growth
Inflation Rate
Interest Rate
Exchange Rate
Unemployment Rate
Fiscal Balance
Current Account Balance
All Indicators
Products: Economic Forecasts & Reports

Major Economies
East and South Asia
Euro Area
Nordics
Central & Eastern Europe
Latin America
Central America & Caribbean
Middle East & North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latest News
ASEAN
MENA
CIS
Commodities
About Us

Our Clients
Our Products
Buy Online
FAQs
Press
Careers
Events
Contact us

Gran Via 657
E-08010 Barcelona, Spain

[email protected]

+34 93 265 10 40

CIF B82162330

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+

Sign up for our newsletter

© Copyright: 2022. | United States Economy | Privacy Policy | Cookies Policy | Terms & Conditions | Sitemap | RSS feed

Major Economies

Canada
Japan
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States
more
ASEAN

Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
more
Central & Eastern Europe

Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Slovakia
more
CIS

Azerbaijan
Kazakhstan
Russia
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
more
MENA

Egypt
Iran
Israel
Saudi Arabia
UAE
more
Latin America

Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Mexico
Venezuela
more
Euro Area

Eurozone
France
Germany
Italy
Spain
more
East & South Asia

China
Hong Kong
India
Korea
Taiwan
more
Nordics

Denmark
Finland
Iceland
Norway
Sweden
more
South-Eastern Europe

Bulgaria
Croatia
Greece
Romania
Turkey
more
Sub-Saharan Africa

Angola
Ethiopia
Kenya
Nigeria
South Africa
more
Central America

Costa Rica
Haiti
Jamaica
Panama
Puerto Rico
more
Real Sector

GDP
GDP per capita
Consumption
Investment
Industry
 

Unemployment
Fiscal Balance
Public Debt
Monetary and Financial Sector

Inflation
Interest Rate
Money
Exchange Rate
External Sector

Current Account
Trade Balance
Exports
Imports
 

International Reserves
External Debt
Energy

Brent Crude Oil
Coking Coal
Gasoil
Gasoline
Natural Gas
 

Thermal Coal
Uranium
WTI Crude Oil
Base Metals

Alumina
Aluminium
Copper
Iron Ore
Lead
 

Nickel
Steel (Europe)
Steel (USA)
Tin
Zinc
Agricultural

Cocoa
Coffee
Corn
Cotton
Soybeans
 

Sugar
Wheat
Wool
Precious Metals

Gold
Palladium
Platinum
Silver
[Image: region]

Region Reports

Major Economies
East and South Asia
Euro Area
Central & Eastern Europe
Latin America
Middle East & North Africa
All Regions
[Image: country]

Country Reports

China
Germany
India
Japan
Saudi Arabia
U.S.
All Countries
Annual Subscriptions

Shopping Cart
Check Out
Need Assistance?